Earth is the third planet from the Sun and home to all known life. While large
volumes of water can be found throughout the Solar System, only Earth sustains
liquid surface water. Approximately 70.8% of Earth's surface is made up of the
ocean, dwarfing Earth's polar ice, lakes, and rivers. The remaining 29.2% of
Earth's surface is land, consisting of continents and islands. Earth's surface
layer is formed of several slowly moving tectonic plates, which interact to
produce mountain ranges, volcanoes, and earthquakes. Earth's liquid outer core
generates the magnetic field that shapes the magnetosphere of Earth, deflecting
destructive solar winds.

The atmosphere of Earth consists mostly of nitrogen and oxygen. Greenhouse
gases in the atmosphere like carbon dioxide (CO2) trap a part of the energy
from the Sun close to the surface. Water vapor is widely present in the
atmosphere and forms clouds that cover most of the planet. More solar energy is
received by tropical regions than polar regions and is redistributed by
atmospheric and ocean circulation. A region's climate is governed not only by
latitude but also by elevation and proximity to moderating oceans. In most
areas, severe weather, such as tropical cyclones, thunderstorms, and heat
waves, occurs and greatly impacts life.

Earth is an ellipsoid with a circumference of about 40,000 km. It is the
densest planet in the Solar System. Of the four rocky planets, it is the
largest and most massive. Earth is about eight light-minutes away from the Sun
and orbits it, taking a year (about 365.25 days) to complete one revolution.
The Earth rotates around its own axis in slightly less than a day (in about 23
hours and 56 minutes). The Earth's axis of rotation is tilted with respect to
the perpendicular to its orbital plane around the Sun, producing seasons. Earth
is orbited by one permanent natural satellite, the Moon, which orbits Earth at
380,000 km (1.3 light seconds) and is roughly a quarter as wide as Earth.
Through tidal locking, the Moon always faces the Earth with the same side,
which causes tides, stabilizes Earth's axis, and gradually slows its rotation.

Earth, like most other bodies in the Solar System, formed 4.5 billion years ago
from gas in the early Solar System. During the first billion years of Earth's
history, the ocean formed and then life developed within it. Life spread
globally and began to affect Earth's atmosphere and surface, leading to the
Great Oxidation Event two billion years ago. Humans emerged 300,000 years ago,
and have reached a population of 8 billion today. Humans depend on Earth's
biosphere and natural resources for their survival, but have increasingly
impacted the planet's environment. Today, humanity's impact on Earth's climate,
soils, waters, and ecosystems is unsustainable, threatening people's lives and
causing widespread extinctions of other life.[27]
