A planet is a large, rounded astronomical body that is neither a star nor its
remnant. The best available theory of planet formation is the nebular
hypothesis, which posits that an interstellar cloud collapses out of a nebula
to create a young protostar orbited by a protoplanetary disk. Planets grow in
this disk by the gradual accumulation of material driven by gravity, a process
called accretion. The Solar System has at least eight planets: the terrestrial
planets Mercury, Venus, Earth and Mars, and the giant planets Jupiter, Saturn,
Uranus and Neptune. These planets each rotate around an axis tilted with
respect to its orbital pole. All of them possess an atmosphere, although that
of Mercury is tenuous, and some share such features as ice caps, seasons,
volcanism, hurricanes, tectonics, and even hydrology. Apart from Venus and
Mars, the Solar System planets generate magnetic fields, and all except Venus
and Mercury have natural satellites. The giant planets bear planetary rings,
the most prominent being those of Saturn.

The word planet probably comes from the Greek planḗtai, meaning "wanderers". In
antiquity, this word referred to the Sun, Moon, and five points of light
visible by the naked eye that moved across the background of the stars—namely,
Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn. Planets have historically had
religious associations: multiple cultures identified celestial bodies with
gods, and these connections with mythology and folklore persist in the schemes
for naming newly discovered Solar System bodies. Earth itself was recognized as
a planet when heliocentrism supplanted geocentrism during the 16th and 17th
centuries.

With the development of the telescope, the meaning of planet broadened to
include objects only visible with assistance: the ice giants Uranus and
Neptune; Ceres and other bodies later recognized to be part of the asteroid
belt; and Pluto, later found to be the largest member of the collection of icy
bodies known as the Kuiper belt. The discovery of other large objects in the
Kuiper belt, particularly Eris, spurred debate about how exactly to define a
planet. The International Astronomical Union (IAU) adopted a standard by which
the four terrestrials and four giants qualify, placing Ceres, Pluto and Eris in
the category of dwarf planet,[1][2][3] although many planetary scientists have
continued to apply the term planet more broadly.[4]

Further advances in astronomy led to the discovery of over five thousand
planets outside the Solar System, termed exoplanets. These include hot
Jupiters—giant planets that orbit close to their parent stars—like 51 Pegasi b,
super-Earths like Gliese 581c that have masses in between that of Earth and
Neptune; and planets smaller than Earth, like Kepler-20e. Multiple exoplanets
have been found to orbit in the habitable zones of their stars, but Earth
remains the only planet known to support life.
